# Early Novels Digital Collection

## About the collection

This repository brings together Fulltext and PDFs from Print at Penn's [Digital Collection of British & American Fiction, 1660-1830](http://dla.library.upenn.edu/dla/print/index.html) and corresponding metadata produced by the Early Novels Dataset.


The University of Pennsylvania Libraries' Collection of British & American Fiction, 1660-1830 (CBAF) numbers nearly three thousand works that together form a rich teaching and research collection of early fiction in English. While drawing from the general Rare Books Collection as well as several smaller named collections, its core is the Singer-Mendenhall Collection, built through the combined efforts of a University of Pennsylvania graduate student and professor in the first half of the twentieth century. Godfrey F. Singer and John C. Mendenhall each accumulated working collections of mainly epistolary fiction; Singer's parents donated his books to the University of Pennsylvania Library after his death in 1934, and Mendenhall added his library in 1950. Augmented over the years by other curators and donors, the Singer-Mendenhall Collection is a remarkably comprehensive body for studying the novel in English.


## Curation process

The digital corpus presented here, curated by Alice Tweedy McGrath and Lindsay Van Tine, represents a varied cross-section of eighteenth-century epistolary fiction in English, following in the eclectic spirit of the archive from which it is drawn. As collectors, Singer and Mendenhall aimed at breadth; they sought not only early editions by well-known authors like Samuel Richardson and Henry Fielding but also obscure and anonymous titles gleaned from bookseller’s advertisements, circulating library catalogues, and even more spurious sources like the title list accompanying George Coleman's Farce *Polly Honeycombe: A Dramatick Novel of One Act* (1760), which lampoons impressionable novel readers.

In choosing works to digitize we have also set our sights beyond the canon to unique and lesser-known titles. Twenty-five titles are here available to researchers in digital form for the first time, including many unique works such as *The Labyrinths of Life* (1791) and *Letters from Clara: or, the Effusions of the Heart* (1771). A further eleven represent unique editions of titles such as *The Wreath of Friendship, or a Return from India* (1790) and Eliza Haywood's *Love in Excess: or, the Fatal Enquiry* (1721). The remaining titles include lesser-known epistolary novels by anonymous or women authors and epistolary collections published before 1740, most of which are not freely available online.

By prioritizing works that remain anonymous, we hope to further expand the archive of eighteenth-century texts available. While much eighteenth-century fiction was published anonymously, many popular titles have since -- over decades or centuries of being reprinted, read, and re-collected -- attached themselves to a named author. Over time, as authorship became an increasingly important factor in conferring literary value, the existence of such a name might both indicate and perpetuate temporal endurance.

Among the many anonymous works in the collection, we chose a subset of titles that specify author gender without specifying name. Works such as *The Mutability of Human Life* (1777) and *The Prude* (1724), published with the author attributions of “a lady” and “a young lady" (respectively), might offer fodder for considering not only practices of authorial naming but also the common trend of associating the epistolary novel with women readers and writers. In *The Denouement: or, the History of Lady Louisa Wingrove* (1781) the anonymous author describes herself as "another pen in petticoats" and delights in her own anonymity; other unnamed "ladies" such as *The Maiden Aunt* (1776) and *The Example: or the History of Lucy Cleveland* (1779) also offer facetious or sincere prefatory apologies for publishing while female.

The works in this collection offer a sample glimpse of a genre in a state of flux and self-justification. Many of these works contain in their front matter preliminary paratexts in which authors reflect upon the increasing ubiquity of novels, or attempt to distinguish their work from the mass of newly-published fiction. The dedication to *Frederick and Alicia* (1791) laments that that “novels are become in general (perhaps through their multitude) insipid, and scarcely fit for perusal,” and hopes for better reception from the dedicatee. The never-before-digitized *Constantia and her daughter Julia* (1769) takes the opposite tack: the prefatory “Discourse on Romances” defends the genre of ‘romance’ by claiming that history is yet more absurd and less interesting, though another piece of front matter claims that it is a story based on fact.

Though prose fiction was "rising" in prestige through the middle decades of the eighteenth-century, the word "novel" on a title page still proclaimed belonging to a dubious category. A substantial number of these titles (published in the 1760s and 1770s) include the word "novel". Many others -- including titles which are unique copies -- were published by proprietors of circulating libraries such as Francis and John Noble, Thomas Lowndes, and William Lane. Scholars have noted the importance of these institutions in the development of the novel marketplace as well as their centrality within public discourses that decried novels as a corrupting influence. Both factors -- and possibly female authorship as well -- may have conferred genre legibility without conferring prestige: while they represent important strands of the market for epistolary fiction, few have endured in reprints or on syllabi. We hope that  making this collection of titles available for reading and text analysis will open up possibilities for the study of prose fiction in all its idiosyncrasies.

## Files
Page images for each title are available through Penn Libraries' [Print at Penn Digital Collection](<http://dla.library.upenn.edu/dla/print/index.html>). This repository includes [full-text surrogates](<https://github.com/earlynovels/digital-collection/tree/master/PaP-END-fulltexts>) and Early Novels Dataset metadata (in [individual MARC XML records](<https://github.com/earlynovels/digital-collection/tree/master/PaP-END-xml-records>) and [tabular form](<https://github.com/earlynovels/digital-collection/blob/master/PaP-END-metadata-curated.csv>)) for each file. You can also access OCRed PDFs for each title through our [Box folder](<https://upenn.box.com/s/t9su0mz1qtv5qtm4s3hhfjjthvk485pg>).
PDFs and text files have been generated through Abbyy FineReader using a recognition pattern hand-trained on this corpus to read eighteenth-century letter forms. The text files have been further remediated using a customized set of rules and Ted Underwood’s OCR [normalizer](<https://tedunderwood.com/2013/12/10/a-half-decent-ocr-normalizer-for-english-texts-after-1700>).
Use this [Google Sheet](<https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1_jjRukUJSpJ3IKLzbkdyWdbfEE6ayzdYgD0KuEb5lBE/edit?usp=sharing>) to locate the corresponding END MARCXML record, fulltext file, and PDF for each Print at Penn digital surrogate.
